Bureau of Interior.
CCC camp.
And it was a time when one of the elections was coming up, and somebody said, how much did you give to the fund?
I said, what are you talking about?
Didn't you get a notice that you had to contribute to the political fund?
This was for a state senator's fund, I think, from Massachusetts.
Really?
For the Democratic Party, naturally.
Sure.
In Massachusetts.
And I said, no, I didn't get any notice, and they wouldn't believe me, because everybody had them, both the military and the civilians.
Over in agriculture, we never had them.
Same time, same state.
That is interesting.
Now, were you paid on the same level that they were paid?
Oh, the military?
No, as the CCC kids.
No, no, no.
Well, I was paid as a... They were paid about $20 a month, I think.
Yeah, and I don't remember what I was getting, but I think it was equivalent of about $1,200 a year.
something on that order, maybe a thousand, but anyway, I was paid as a forester.
See, there were shortages of graduate foresters, and so they patched in with undergraduates.
And did you eat with the CCC kids?
Yes.
And did you wear a uniform like they did?
God, it's so far back that I don't remember what I wore, but I expect so.
At least I wore whatever the foresters were wearing, I guess, green or something.
And let's say you wanted to have a particular job done.
Did they do the job for you, like to clear a certain piece of property or...
or did you tell the officers, the first lieutenants in charge of the CCCs, and the CCC kids then carried it out, or how did it work?
What was your relationship?
Off the station, we were the boss.
We got our orders from the Forest Service.
Gardner or New Haven, depending on where it was.
And it was straight line separation from the military on the work project.
But we conformed to all the regulations in the camps.
As far as work hours, as far as when I stayed in the camps, just wait.
They ran with me.
Give me sort of a daily routine.
In the CCC's?
Yeah.
Used to get up, I guess it was about a quarter to six or something, such thing like this.
We'd have breakfast 20 minutes to seven or so and be on our way to the field, to the forest, seven o'clock.
We'd get back, depending on how
as far as we were working from the camp, but sometimes it was the size of travel.
We'd get back to the camp, or try to.
And then it was free time.
There wasn't much recreation.
The Army tried to have as much recreation as they could, softball, baseball, things like this.
But in the early years, they didn't have an educational program then, those early ones.
But they did have recreation.
And then in September you went back to the University of Minnesota?
No, I didn't go back in September.
I stayed until January.
Oh, so you were in the CCC's then nine months, basically.
And then, when I went... Why did you decide to stay on?
To get some money.
In case you were broke.
Right.
Then I worked on an assignment the next year, during the summer, into a winter quarter also, out in Idaho for the Forest Service.
But that wasn't... Now, administratively,
After your sophomore year, you worked for the CCCs.
And then after your junior year, it was the National Forest Service.
But the Forest Service was involved in that sophomore thing by way of the Northeastern Forest Experiment Station.
This is the research branch of the Forest Service.
The next year, I was out in Idaho National Forest.
Okay, but before we get to that next year, you mentioned, here's one thing, before we leave the CCCs, you mentioned that it was there that you first were introduced to genetics.
Is that right?
Yes, I was using CCC crews.
For the Northeastern Forest Experiment Station.
On the Hopkins, what became known as the Hopkins Experimental Forest.
And we were, as I say, laying out, mapping, taking inventory of all the different species that were on the properties.
putting in the stakes where the plots were going to be grown, the breeding plots were going to be grown, but I never got down to the point where I was actually working with the variation.
But I collected a lot of the native vegetation.
I started the herbarium.
And once about, must have been eight, nine years ago, after Williams College had taken over the station, I got a letter from the president.
in Mexico.
I was just leaving for India.
And he said, look, our graduation is coming up in about three weeks.
We see that you were the hidden hand behind me.
laying out the whole herbarium here, which is now part of our collection at Williams College.
And this has grown into a very nice research station for environment and the whole gamut of things like this for the biology department.
He said, we'd like to invite you to our graduation and we want to give you an honorary degree if you accept.
and I had to write him and say, well, I'm leaving for India and I won't be back.
And I never made contact with him until now he's the head of the Mellon Foundation, the man who was president.
A year ago last summer when I gave a lecture out up at the Summer Course in Colorado, what's the name of this famous summer program?
At the University of Colorado?
No, it's set up under some special program.
Anyway, there were quite a few people there and this man, who had been president of Williams, was now president of the Mellon Foundation, I believe it is, and he said, finally I see the ghost.
So those, the forestry ties come back.
But this is the first time you ever were introduced to genetics.
Do you remember what some of your feelings were about the study of genetics?
Well, at that time I didn't get close enough to really have any feel, but I recognized the variation.
Because I was always looking at these chestnuts.
Some of them would die faster than the others.
And by then there was quite a bit of Dutch elm disease around in New England also.
I kept looking at this.
And I had taken a beginning genetics course back in the university.
And so, this had me thinking about this, but I didn't have a chance to really work with it then.
Okay, let's go to the next summer then.
Next summer.
Up in Idaho with the National Forest Service.
Yes, with the Idaho National Forest.
And I was assigned to what was reputed to have been the most isolated forester in the USA.
I was in the middle of the Chamberlain Basin wilderness area.
We called them primitive areas in that time, not wilderness, primitive.
No roads in there, and I was back on the Middle Fork with the Salmon River, the river of no return, and completely isolated.
We went in by
saddle horse and they took the horses out because it was high elevation.
You couldn't keep the horses there.
There wasn't enough feed.
So you were left on fire alone.
There were a few scattered around.
And the food would be... No, they had put up log cabin.
And always they were at high elevation for fire so you could see.
boasts all the problems with water and everything else but it was a real good experience also and wonderful.
This is where I got a feel for wildlife because it was untouched.
The alp and the bear, a whole gamut of things and of course cooked your own food, washed your own clothing, carried your own water and
Only contact we had, we had a telephone, of course, and one of those pre... Yeah, a telephone?
Yeah, a four-service telephone because of fire.
They're all connected in a network to the dispatcher's office at the ranger headquarters, about 50 miles away.
Then we had one of these early TL high-frequency radios
They used to fly a patrol plane over this area because it was so isolated.
But these were pre-World War II, so you could talk to them if there wasn't too much static around.
Lots of times you couldn't understand each other, but we used them as best we could.
And what was your function up there?
Spotting fires and sometimes being the lead guy onto them.
Many fires, of course, if you catch them early enough, well, you can put them out with one man.
But, and that means that spotting is critical.
Of course, I saw some of the other kind where they blew up completely and where we had terrible times.
Hundreds of people brought in into that back country and then supplying them.
with food, dropping it out of planes and most of it would get lost before you could get, or bust it, before you could get the back strings established on a regular basis to bring enough food in.
Of course, that's all been changed now with the jumpers.
This preceded that.
But there is where I learned to know myself probably better than
than any other place in my life.
In what way?
Well, to get along with yourself and to, you have to get interested in lots of things because you soon run out of, you read everything that you brought with you, which you couldn't bring very much because of difficulties of caring.
You soon ran out of reading material and so you had to,
try to get interested in all sorts of things in nature, from chipmunks to pack rats used to fascinate me and also infuriate me.
They'd pick up anything that you'd leave down, carry it away.
Leather gloves.
I ended up with one.
They carried it away.
All of these sorts of things.
Then I became interested there in collecting
forest diseases, forest trees, because I was going to take another course in forest pathology would have been my senior year.
So I collected a lot of specimens that I took along that mission.
Once in a while I'd try to go down when I could either get up early enough so you couldn't see, because you were supposed to be on fire duty as soon as you had good visibility to catch some fish.
There were a lot of trout.
I betcha.
One thing that impressed me was all of the year when the salmon would run.
Of course, by the time they'd get up to these headwaters, they were dying.
They weren't edible.
I bet you had a lot of eagles, didn't you?
Yeah, there were eagles there, but I don't remember too many of them, really.
A lot of elk and grizzly?
Lots of elk.
Grizzly and grouse, full blue grouse.
Yeah, spruce grouse.
And chipmunks.
pack rats.
What kind of trout?
Brook trout and cutthroat?
Cutthroat, mostly.
Did you eat a lot of fish?
As much as I could.
Yeah.
Because it didn't get any fresh meat, of course.
How many?
And there were deer back there also.
Oh, yeah.
How many?
worked with you up there?
All alone.
You were all alone?
No wonder you got to know yourself so well.
Yeah.
And there was one old prospector that had been back in that country
Matty Mann, he is a character.
I only saw him once, but he used to call me on the telephone, because he had a telephone too, because he had been there, he knew the country, and so he could report very often to the people, what's the best way to get into a certain canyon.
And also, he served as an area.
He would call every once in a while, and they'd say, how you doing up there?
and kind of a guiding old fatherly hand.
I remember as a young boy, I always used to see the bread being baked at home, my grandmother and my mother also.
I thought I knew how to bake bread.
I got up there and I was too high up in the east.
It was too cold at night.
The east just wouldn't work.
the first weeks I eat those damn baking powder biscuits which turn me off even up to today.
Finally one day I was talking to Matty Mann and he said, oh, he said, get you a pencil.
He said, I'll tell you how to fix sourdough and you won't have any more problems.
So that's when I became a sourdough advocate.
He used to give us lots of tips about different things.
Real character.
How long were you alone?
About six months.
Six months without seeing another person?
Well, one person just brought some extra supplies once.
Well, I saw two other people when I was sent out on the fire and I found it first and then the follow-up proves it came from other directions.
I came in and it blew up before I, but I got sent back.
The two that followed me in, they said, you get back up there because it was real fire weather.
The night before, you have dry thunderstorms out there.
Sometimes it doesn't rain at all, but a lot of lightning.
That night before, there'd been one of those.
These two people who came in,
told me I had to get back to the headquarters, I mean up where I was on the base because they were afraid that there were more fires around.
It turned out they'd sent in quite a few people coming from the opposite direction and so I saw those two people but the only other one that I really talked to was the Packer.
Why'd you stay up there six months?
Didn't it freeze out come September or October?
They keep them on in the bad places up until snow.
Depends on the area, but in this area and I was there before fire season really started fixing telephone lines and all these sorts of things.
So you went up there in June now then?
Oh, in May.
So, it was school last till June, didn't it?
Yeah, but I took off.
I don't know how it was, but I must have got the exams.
I left immediately.
And you stayed up there until November then?
Yeah.
I got back to Minnesota halfway through the quarter and took a, and I was taking a physics course.
I got there,
Just in time to, I suppose it was the mid-quarter exam.
I think I got an 18 on the first day.
I'm saying I've only been in the classroom one or two days.
It's amazing that they even let you take the course.
They never let you take it today.
Then I really had to scramble.
I got good grades later, but I had a hell of a time.
I got a D. It's the only time I ever got a D in my whole life, even though I got a very good grade on my final, and I got a pretty good grade on my lab work.
It's the only D I ever got in my whole life, and that turned me off.
Well, at that time then, you were just becoming a senior?
Let's see.
No, no.
I was... No, I was senior.
I only had one quarter left.
Somewhere along here we've lost a year.
But I went back to take the final quarter.
That was my final quarter.
Fall quarter.
No kidding.
Yeah, we did lose a year someplace.
Someplace.
freshman, sophomore, junior.
Oh, I know what happened.
You got your degree in 1937?
Was that December 1937?
Oh, it was December of 37, I see.
So that was the fall quarter I went back to.
I remember one thing that I left out here.
The freshman year, normally, at the end of your first year in forestry, you used to go to Cloquet, a summer camp.
It was field forest experience.
But I didn't have enough money to make that.
You had to pay for your
grub.
We lived in the university cabins.
But I got a job once when I was hitchhiking home, I guess, for spring vacation.
A young agronomist picked me up that worked for Reed Murdock Canning Company in Rochester.
And we were talking and he said, if you want to work this summer, I'll see if I can find you a job.
He handled all the seal operations.
He was graduating around in Illinois.
So, I went down there after school, and that's where I missed a year, I'll tell you now.
I went down and worked in the field.
So, this was 1934 then?
This was 1934.
Summer of 1934.
We were harvesting peas first, and I guess I worked pretty well.
At least he made me a timekeeper.
The growing wage at that time was 15 cents an hour.
When I got to be a timekeeper, I'd get 18 cents an hour, but it had the advantage I could work as many hours as I wanted to, because we had to keep those green peas going in 24 hours a day into the plant.
We had to get them out of the field.
And so I'd work and turn in about 18, 19 hours a day and sleep a few hours up in the haymouth, in the farm that we happened to be on, and just grab some bites and root.
Same thing during the corn, sweet corn pack.
And then he'd let me stay on right up to school because they saved their own corn for seed, seed corn.
And I'd handle and dry that.
Then my sophomore year, I had to go to Cloquet, or to Itasca Park for the practical forestry training.
It was the beginning of my junior year that I went out to, or it was after my junior year that I went out to Massachusetts.
That's where we lost a year.
The second year, after my sophomore year, I had to do what I should have done after my freshman year, go to summer camp.
But by then I had the good fortune also of having worked for my board room in restaurants and in restaurants and in sorority house.
I knew a lot about handling food and supplies.
And so they elected me as steward to handle all the food operations up at summer camp.
And for that
I got my free food.
Oh great.
So I did that.
How valuable was summertime?
Very good.
Was it?
From the standpoint of thought.
Well we got a broad training in the application of forestry, especially from the standpoint of silviculture, forest nationals.
estimating timber volume, scaling logs.
The one that I enjoyed most was we had a field course in botany.
Dr. Rosendahl, who was one of the good taxonomists at Minnesota, very kindly person, and one in ornithology from Dr. Dawson.
And both of those, I got very close to both of those two excellent professors.
My feel for nature, undisturbed, came in a large part from both of those two people.
Oh, I'd like to talk about that and some of the professors and some of the impact that these particular individuals had in your education in Minnesota.
But before we move away from the summer camp, I was wondering, yeah.
And so it was after my junior year that I went to Massachusetts the first time.
And right before you were a senior that you went out to Idaho.
Right.
But I only had one quarter left because he had been in and out and I was an irregular student.
But I was wondering at the summer camp and in forestry in general, were there any women in these classes at all?
Today women are taking a number of these classes that have been so-called traditional male fields.
At Minnesota when I was there there were no
girls studying forestry, but Minnesota had been a pioneer in this, in that one of the first women graduates in forestry was Alice Stewart, who, when I worked in New England, she worked for the Northeastern Forest Experiment Station, and she lived in New Haven, worked at the headquarters on recreation mostly, outdoor recreation.
So I got to know her there and Dickerman and he and I used to get together every once in a while.
The Dickerman that I mentioned that became the deputy chief.
But there were no girls studying forestry at that time, but she had graduated by respect to two years before I started.
So she was one of the early graduates in forestry.
Did you think it was somewhat unusual that a woman would be interested in that field at that time?
What were your thoughts?
Well, I never gave it much thought at the time, except I used to think once in a while when we would get together, I'd go down Dickerman's home in New Haven.
So on Thanksgiving, I remember we went down and we went out to dance someplace or another.
And I took Alice Stewart along.
She danced very well, and she was a very pleasant person, and I got to thinking later.
I never mentioned it to her, but I often thought, how did she ever happen to start into forestry?
Because she was quite ladylike, quite feminine.
Of course, you've seen almost a revolution in that.
Oh, yeah.
It's a different world.
It sure is.
Well, now let's go back to the professors and some of the impact that they had at the University of Minnesota.
Could you analyze the quality of your instruction now?
At the undergraduate level, let me start there.
Yeah, well, we're not going to even get to the graduate level today.
At the undergraduate level, in the general college, Fred Humphrey touched me with kindness and
Motivation.
I shouldn't say motivation, that has to come from within.
Stimulation.
He stimulated me and this had a great deal to do, I'm sure, with how I got myself organized.
When I moved to forestry, the dean of forestry, Hank Schmitz, Henry Schmitz,
was a very dynamic person, but also sometimes rather impatient.
He later moved up to be the dean of the college and became president of Washington University.
University of Washington, not Washington University, St.
Louis.
Not George Washington, but Seattle.
Seattle.
very dynamic person, a good spokesman for forestry, sharp individual, but he wasn't the best professor by any means with students.
He happened to be my advisor also.
When he would work out my program, he'd say, well, you better take this and this and this.
I said, but I can't take that course because I've got to work for my
bored those hours.
I have conflict here.
And every once in a while he'd give me fits.
He'd say, what are you doing?
Did you come here to go to school or did you come here to work?
I said, I don't have any choice.
This used to upset me.
Later, he was also on my graduate committee and he became close friends, but this was pretty disturbing when you're a freshman, sophomore.
and you're up to here with nothing to eat.
But there was a compensation.
There was a professor of civics and silviculture, Bill Cheney, C-H-E-Y-N-E-Y.
He was a wonderful, sort of down-to-earth, easy-going guy with his pipe, kind of Will Rogers philosopher type.
And he always used to illustrate his points very well in his lectures with stories.
And many of these stories had the barbs on him so he wouldn't forget them.
He was a very good teacher.
And I suppose in forestry, per se, he had a very strong influence on me and got me deeply involved in this.
There were others.
Then there was a young instructor at that time whose footprints I followed later after I finished graduate school by the name of Frank Crawford, who was a forester by training, took his doctorate in gland pathology under Dr. Stateman,
had come back and he was an instructor in forestry and forest products when I was an undergraduate.
In the last quarter that I worked on NYA, I was assigned to work for him.
He was running some studies on decay of wood with fungi and he was very stimulating.
He had just finished his doctorate.
He subsequently moved on to the job in DuPont Chemical Company.
So that's why you work for DuPont later on?
We'll get to that.
So, let's see who else.
I've mentioned this botany professor.
He was from the main campus that taught the summer courses.
in the same way with Ralph Dawson, the ornithologist, he was from the main campus, from zoology, they both left a big imprint on them.
Then, indirectly from another department, at undergraduate level, Clyde Christensen,
He was one of the Department of Plant Pathology, but he was the forest pathologist in the Department of Plant Pathology.
One of the most brilliant teachers that I ever came across, except for statement.
But in some ways, he had some idiosyncrasies that were very irritating.
I remember when I first walked into his forest pathology one class.
It was during the winter quarter, cold, and I had my big M sweater on because it was the only really warm thing that I had, that in a light jacket.
And athletics used to turn him off.
And so I walked in and sat down and he was a master at asking leading questions.
I guess that big M just rubbed him the wrong way and burped.
This was the first day we hadn't even had a text assigned.
He didn't use it.
It turned out he didn't use a text.
He had a series of references.
But he started in asking questions right off.
And these kind of damn things, you know, that were leading questions, and I tried to ask and answer.
I had no preparation.
Lead me out farther and farther.
I'd make a wrong statement, and then he'd lead you farther until you saw that you were ridiculous.
Probably every damn question you'd answer was wrong.
This made me burn.
really made me burn.
And I said, damn, he'll never do this to me again.
Oh, is he ridiculing you for wearing that sweater?
I have a feeling that underneath it was that.
He did it to other people, too.
But the first day, I think that sweater was the one that turned him on to me.
And I said to myself, he will never do this to me again.
And I suspect that I read
those references farther ahead than in any course I'd ever taken.
When he'd come to work on me, I would just spit these things out in concise little statements.
After about five goes at this over the next three weeks or so, he never asked me another question.
In graduate school, he became my, at the master's level, my advisor.
And that was, by then, I was telling you that I'd collected diseases and whatnot.
So I'd become interested in forest pathology.
But he really turned me off.
But on the other hand, he was one of the best teachers that I've ever seen.
And in his practical laboratory classes, he did the same tricks.
You'd have a whole series of microscopes set up.
And there would be, let's say, five questions.
One main question and then five sub-questions.
The main one was identification.
And if you missed that, you missed all the rest of them because you automatically answered all the rest of them wrong.
And he would state it so that
by the context of this, he would try to mislead you into thinking that it was another disease.
Really!
He was really vicious.
But he trained good people, didn't he?
But he made you think.
You just had that irritating way of making you take stock of yourself.
As a matter of fact,
I haven't got to them yet, but he has just written a book about the life of Stateman, Stateman, who died two, three years ago, major professor.
It was his major professor in mind.
It's being published right now.
It just went on the press yesterday, and I got to identify this picture.
They just called me.
I tried to call before you came in.
I didn't get this statement here.
But Clyde Christensen wrote this book.
life of statement.
And so, and I wrote the foreword to it just a week or so ago, just going on in the press.
Who's going to publish it?
I think it's Minnesota Press.
No, I take that back.
It's the phytopath.
They have their headquarters there.
I guess they have a regulation or arrangement with some other press.
I'm not sure.
But anyway, Clyde was an excellent teacher, but boy, that's where you learn to think and not to be misled.
Now, one last question about your undergraduate career and just the undergraduate career.
When you went out in the field and you met people who were in forestry and attended other universities, you got an opportunity to compare your knowledge you gained in Minnesota versus theirs.
What do you think on a sort of a national level was your education?
What quality would you say?
In forestry, where I took my undergraduate work, I thought it was one of the best forestry schools in the United States at that time.
I hope it wasn't too biased.
It was a good school.
And especially because of the supporting courses you got.
For example, I was mentioning forest pathology.
In entomology, where I worked.
In zoology, in botany.
they were first-rate in biochemistry.
They had very prominent people in genetics, in Hayes's department.
So that even though they weren't all in the School of Forestry, the support in the basic principles was excellent.
And the way that during this last quarter of undergraduate, right before exams,
I saw a notice on the bulletin board that Dr. E.C.
Stateman was going to give a Sigma Psi lecture.
And my only contact with him was once in Clyde Christensen's forest pathology lab.
This man opened the door.
We were all sitting around looking at microscopes.
I remember even what we were looking at.
We were looking at blue stained fungi and pine.
And this person stuck his head in and said, Dr. Christensen here.
Somebody said, you just stepped out, I think you'll be back in a few minutes.
So, this professor, elderly, very dignified man, came in and said, well, what are you doing?
He started coming down.
I was probably three places down from him, but I could hear him as he was looking over the shoulder at this guy, drawing the mycelium of the stained fungi in the rays and cells of the pine.
And he said, well, that isn't quite right.
Doesn't it look more like this?
with a pipe in his mouth.
And he was giving an explanation, but not in a very low key, but making some suggestions.
I know who he was, but I never had any contact.
And he came to the next one and I heard this.
By then, before he got to me, he was moving down.
Clyde Christensen came in, and that was the end of it.
And I thought, my God, how does this guy know anything about forestry?
This was statement.
So that last quarter, I saw he was going to give this Sigma Psi lecture just before finding an exam.
So I went to listen to this.
This was...
these shifty little enemies that destroy our crops or something like that.
I was really taken up.
He was a very effective speaker and he showed some good slides to show the complexities of the rust fungi in our cereals and I thought,
Someday, if I ever take graduate work, I want to study with him.
He made such an impression.
It so happened that I was going back to the Forest Service.
By then, I had taken my junior forestry exam, the civil service thing, and I was the highest in our class.
Only about three of us passed the thing.
It was tough in that time because they wanted the tough because there wasn't enough jobs by there.
And so before I left Idaho,
coming back in the middle of the quarter.
They said, all right, you can come back in the middle of January.
We'll have a permanent job for you.
So, I went through graduation, and right about Christmas time, I got a letter from the supervisor.
He said, look, would it be all right with you if you came the middle of May?
because we've got some budget problems, and this will ease it for us if you can find something worthwhile to do on taildown.
So I decided I'd start graduate school, take one quarter, just one quarter with steak.
That will stay out.
And that one quarter led to the inevitable.
But I did go out on one further assignment back in New England on forestry.
I guess I just about finished my master's in that emergency after that hurricane blew down all that timber.
Well, this is a good place to stop.